# barapost toolkit
**So to speak, "*a posteriori* barcoding"**

Version 1.1
26.08.2019 edition

## 1. barapost.py

### DESCRIPTION:

 Script "barapost.py" is designed for determinating the taxonomic position
    of nucleotide sequences by blasting each of them and regarding the best hit.

 Script processes FASTQ and FASTA files (files can be gzipped).

 Results of the work of this script are written to TSV file,
    that can be found in result directory.

 If no separate input (FASTQ, FASTA) files and not input directory is specified,
    "barapost.by" will process all FASTQ and FASTA files in current directory.

 FASTQ and/or FASTA files processed by this script are meant to be sorted afterwards by "fastQA_sorter.py".


### Default parameters:

- all FASTQ and FASTA files in current directory will be processed;
- packet size (see `-p` option): 100 sequences;
- algorithm (see `-a` option): `megaBlast`;
- organisms (see `-g` option): full `nt` database, e.i. no slices;
- output directory (`-o` option): directory named `"barapost_result_<date_and_time_of_run>"`
  nested in current directory;


### OPTIONS:

```
    -h (--help) --- show help message;

    -f (--infile) --- input FASTQ or FASTA file. File can be gzipped.
            You can specify multiple input files with this option (see EXAMPLES #2);

    -d (--indir) --- directory which contains FASTQ or FASTA files meant to be processed.
            E.i. all FASTQ and FASTA files in this direcory will be processed; Files can be gzipped.

    -o (--outdir) --- output directory;

    -p (--packet-size) --- size of the packet, e.i. number of sequence to blast in one request.
            Value: integer number [1, 1000]. Default value is 20;

    -a (--algorithm) --- BLASTn algorithm to use for aligning.
            Available values: 'megaBlast', 'discoMegablast', 'blastn'.
            Default is megaBlast;

    -g (--organisms) --- 'nt' database slices, e.i. organisms that you expect to see in result files.
            Format of value: 
              <organism1_name>,<organism1_taxid>+<organism2_name>,<organism2_taxid>+...
            See EXAMPLES #2 and #3 below.
            Spaces are not allowed. Number of organisms can be from 1 to 5 (5 is maximum).
            Default is: full 'nt' database, e.i. no slices.
```

- More clearly, functionality of `-g` option is totally equal to "Organism" text boxes on this BLASTn page:
    'https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastn&PAGE_TYPE=BlastSearch&LINK_LOC=blasthome'.
- You can find your Taxonomy IDs here: 'https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi'.


### EXAMPLES:

  1) Process one file with default settings:

`./barapost.py -f reads.fastq`

  2) Process a FASTQ file and a FASTA file with discoMegablast, packet size of 5 sequences.
       Search only among Erwinia sequences:

`./barapost.py -f reads_1.fastq.gz -f some_sequences.fasta -a discoMegablast -p 5 -g Erwinia,551`

  3) Process all FASTQ and FASTA files in directory named `some_dir`.
     Search only among Escherichia and viral sequences:

`./barapost.py -d some_dir -g Escherichia,561+viruses,10239 -o outdir`


## 2. fastQA_sorter.py
(fast**Q** and fast**A** sorter)

### DESCRIPTION:

 Script "fastQA_forter.py" is designed for sorting FASTQ and/or FASTA files processed by "barapost.py".

 Requires result TSV file generated by "barapost.py" and FASTQ or FASTA files processed by it.
 Therefore `-b` option is mandatory.

 Separate FASTQ or FASTA files should be specified with `-f(--infile)` option (see EXAMPLES #2 below).
 
 If `-d (--indir)` option is specified, all FASTQ and FASTA files in directory specified by this option will be sorted.
 
 If no separate FASTQ or FASTA files and not input directory is specified,
       "fastQA_sorter.py" will process all FASTQ and FASTA files in current directory.


### Default parameters:

- all FASTQ and FASTA files in current directory will be processed;
- sorting sensitivity (see `-s` option): `species`;
- output directory (`-o` option): directory named `"fastQA_sorter_result_<date_and_time_of_run>"`
  nested in current directory;

### OPTIONS (* means mandatory option):

```
    -h (--help) --- show help message;

  * -b (--barapost-result) --- result TSV file generated by "barapost.py";

    -f (--infile) --- input FASTQ or FASTA file (can be gzipped);

    -d (--indir) --- directory which contains FASTQ and/or FASTA files
        (files can be gzipped) meant to be sorted;

    -o (--outdir) --- output directory;

    -s (--sorting-sensitivity) --- sorting sensitivity;
        E.i. the lowest taxonomy rank that will be used in names of resut files;
        Available values: 'genus', 'species', 'strain';
```


### EXAMPLES:

  1) Process one FASTQ file with default settings:

`./fastQA_sorter.py -f reads.fastq.gz -b test_megaBlast_result.tsv`

  2) Process a FASTQ file and a FASTA file, place results in "outdir" directory:

`./fastQA_sorter.py -f reads_1.fastq.gz -f some_sequnces.fasta -o outdir -b test_megaBlast_result.tsv`

  3) Process all files in directory named "dir_with_seqs". Sort by genus:

`./fastQA_sorter.py -d dir_with_seqs -o outdir -b test_megaBlast_result.tsv -s genus`

## Example of usage in combination:

You can try this scripts on test dataset named `some_reads.fastq` (there are 4 reads):

  `./barapost.py -f some_reads.fastq -o ./ -g Escherichia,561+viruses,10239`

  `./fastQA_sorter.py -f some_reads.fastq -b some_reads/some_reads_megaBlast_result.tsv -o some_sorted_reads`
